1. Chirurgia (Bucur). 2025 Jul;120(Ahead of print):1-11. doi: 
10.21614/chirurgia.3129.

The Impact of Laparoscopic Transversus Abdominis Release on the Intra-Abdominal 
Pressure in Patients with Large Anterior Wall Defects.

Vasile MA, Cochior D, Ștefanescu V, Betianu C, Neagu A, Bucur A, Turcu FL, 
Georgescu DE, Enciu O, Pã Traşcu T.

Introduction: The objective of this study was to collect and analyze data on 
patient demographics, lifestyle, abdominal cavity characteristics, and their 
impact on intra-abdominal pressure before and after minimally invasive treatment 
of large parietal defects in hernia pathology. Additionally, the study examines 
the role of the CT scan as a reliable and valid measure of defect and muscle 
characteristics, which can help establish the indication for performing 
Transversus Abdominis Release (TAR) and evaluate the outcomes of this procedure 
along with differences in intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) and plateau pressure 
(Pplat). Methods: This prospective study involved 20 patients with parietal 
defects wider than 10 cm, treated over four years at the Central Military 
Hospital in Bucharest. All procedures were performed using the laparoscopic TAR 
technique by the same surgical team. Preoperative assessments included CT 
imaging to measure defect size, volumes, and IAP. Data including defect 
dimensions, muscle measurements, IAP, and Pplat were systematically recorded in 
a dedicated database with a follow-up at 6 months with clinical and imaging 
evaluations. Results: In our cohort of 20 patients, all female, the mean BMI was 
26.81+-3.05, and the hernia sac volume (HSV) averaged 159.01+-189.79 cmÂ³. The 
defect area was 69.53 cmÂ² (+-30.11). IAP decreased from 5 cmH2O (+-1.28) 
preoperatively to 1.91 cmH2O (Ã+-1.93) postoperatively. The reduction in Pplat 
was similarly significant. Pressure variations were influenced by the 
topographic location of the defect, with higher pressures seen in epigastric 
defects, and by the characteristics of the peritoneo-fascial defects, including 
number, size, and localization, which affect pressure outcomes. Additionally, 
dimensions of the anterior-lateral abdominal muscles correlated with pressure 
changes. These findings highlight the importance of comprehensive preoperative 
assessment of defect characteristics, muscular anatomy, and defect location for 
predicting pressure reductions and guiding surgical planning. Conclusions: 
Higher BMI and large, multiple parietal defects predict increased IAP and Pplat 
postoperatively. Preoperative volumetric and morphometric parameters, defect 
localization, and topographic characteristics significantly influence pressure 
outcomes. The TAR technique effectively manages large defects while minimizing 
pressure increases, but consideration of morphological factors is crucial for 
optimal results. Further research is needed to refine patient selection and 
surgical strategies.

Celsius.

DOI: 10.21614/chirurgia.3129
PMID: 40778469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]