1. Portal Hypertens Cirrhosis. 2025 Mar;4(1):66-78. doi: 10.1002/poh2.100. Epub 
2025 Jan 22.

Resmetirom and thyroid hormone receptor-targeted treatment for metabolic 
dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD).

Liu CH(1), Zeng QM(2), Hu TY(2), Huang Y(3), Song Y(4), Guan H(5), Rockey DC(6), 
Tang H(1), Li S(3).

Author information:
(1)Center of Infectious Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China. Laboratory of Infectious and Liver Diseases, Institute of 
Infectious Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(2)West China School of Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China. Laboratory of Infectious and Liver Diseases, Institute of 
Infectious Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism and Department of Guideline and 
Rapid Recommendation, Cochrane China Center, MAGIC China Center, Chinese 
Evidence-Based Medicine Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Central Hospital affiliated to Shandong First 
Medical University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.
(6)Digestive Disease Research Center, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, South Carolina, USA.

Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) is a rapidly 
increasing chronic disease worldwide, particularly among patients with type 2 
diabetes. Its severe form, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis 
(MASH), is also on the rise. The treatment of MASLD and MASH poses significant 
challenges. Thyroid hormones and their receptors (TR) agonists, especially 
resmetirom, have shown potential in improving metabolism and reducing liver 
inflammation. Thyroid hormones play a crucial role in regulating metabolism and 
maintaining physiological balance. However, in patients with MASLD, there is a 
reduced conversion of 3,3',5,5'-tetraiodo-L-thyronine (T4) to biologically 
active 3,5,3'-triiodo-L-thyronine (T3), resulting in decreased T3 levels and 
impaired hepatic TR signaling. This hormonal imbalance is associated with 
disrupted hepatic lipid metabolism. Resmetirom, an oral selective TR agonist 
that specifically targets hepatocytes, was approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) in March 2024 for the treatment of moderate to severe liver 
fibrosis in non-cirrhotic adults with MASH. This approval was based on the 
results of the MAESTRO clinical program, which includes multiple-stage research 
designs such as the MAESTRO-NASH, MAESTRO-NAFLD-1, MAESTRO-NAFLD-OLE, and 
MAESTRO-NASH-OUTCOMES, aims to evaluate the efficacy and safety of resmetirom in 
different populations of MASH patient. Although the approval of resmetirom 
represents a significant milestone in the treatment of MAFLD and MASH, many 
questions remain regarding its long-term effectiveness and impact on clinical 
outcomes. Ongoing research, particularly through the MAESTRO program, holds 
promise for providing additional insights into the long-term management of MASLD 
using resmetirom and other similar medications.

DOI: 10.1002/poh2.100
PMCID: PMC12327538
PMID: 40777891

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT Don C Rockey is 
the Editor-in-Chief of Portal Hypertension & Cirrhosis. He is therefore excluded 
from the peer-review process and all editorial decisions related to the 
publication of this manuscript. The remaining authors declared that they have no 
other conflict of interest with reference to this manuscript.