1. Sleep Breath. 2025 Aug 8;29(4):268. doi: 10.1007/s11325-025-03434-9.

Osa in women: When does cpap increase blood pressure?

Oscullo G(1)(2), Bekki A(1)(2), Beaperthuy T(3), Gómez-Olivas JD(1)(2), Anglés 
M(1)(2), Mompeán S(1)(2), Martínez R(1)(2), Ponce S(4), Pengo MF(5)(6), 
Martinez-Garcia MA(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Department, Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe, Valencia, 
Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria la Fe. Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Respiratory Unit, Requena General Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Respiratory Department, Hospital Peset Aleixandre. Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular, Neural and Metabolic Sciences, IRCCS Istituto 
Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, 
Italy.
(7)Respiratory Department, Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe, Valencia, 
Spain. mianmartinezgarcia@gmail.com.
(8)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria la Fe. Valencia, Valencia, Spain. 
mianmartinezgarcia@gmail.com.
(9)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red (CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Carlos 
III, Madrid, Spain. mianmartinezgarcia@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: There has been only one randomised clinical trial (RCT) on the 
effect of CPAP on women at three months. It showed that, overall, this treatment 
had no effect on blood pressure levels, even though some of the women presented 
increased blood pressure while under CPAP. Identifying this group of women could 
therefore be of clinical interest.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the risk factors for an increase (of at least 2 mmHg of 
BP) by analysing the CPAP arm of this RCT in those patients with inadequate and 
good adherence to CPAP.
METHODS: 151 women from the CPAP arm of the RCT were included. They all followed 
a complete sleep protocol that included CPAP pressure titration and office BP 
measures at baseline and one and three months after beginning CPAP treatment.
RESULTS: After exclusion, 137 women began the study. 69.3% showed good adherence 
to CPAP at 3 months and 77 patients (56.2%) increased their BP. In the overall 
group of women (independently of their adherence to CPAP), age, the presence of 
depression, baseline AHI and baseline SBP were associated with an increased BP 
(at least 2 mmHg) at 1 and 3 months. However, the BP increase was observed 
during the first month and tended to stabilize towards the third month.
CONCLUSION: Greater age, the presence of depression and higher baseline AHI and 
SBP were independently associated with a clinical significant increase in BP 
after CPAP, regardless of their adherence. These changes in BP appeared mainly 
during the first month of treatment.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s11325-025-03434-9
PMID: 40779000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Use of artificial intelligence: 
No. Conflict of interest: No Conflicts of Interest. All authors certify that 
they have no affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with 
any financial interest (such as honoraria; educational grants; participation in 
speakers’ bureaus; membership, employment, consultancies, stock ownership, or 
other equity interest; and expert testimony or patent-licensing arrangements), 
or non-financial interest (such as personal or professional relationships, 
affiliations, knowledge or beliefs) in the subject matter or materials discussed 
in this manuscript. Ethics approval and consent to participate: This article 
does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any 
of the authors. Ethical Committee: Hospital Universitario de Valme, Ctra Cadiz 
S/N, 41014 Sevilla.