1. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2025 Aug 8. doi: 
10.1080/17474124.2025.2545812. Online ahead of print.

Food insecurity is an emerging risk factor for liver disease: a scoping review.

Lonardo A(1), Zheng MH(2), Weiskirchen R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Modena 
(-2023), Modena, Italy.
(2)MAFLD Research Center, Department of Hepatology, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(3)Institute of Molecular Pathobiochemistry, Experimental Gene Therapy and 
Clinical Chemistry (IFMPEGKC), RWTH University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Food insecurity, the household-level socio-economic condition of 
having limited or uncertain ability to acquire adequate and safe food, has 
affected 13.8 million households in the United States in 2020 and is a cofactor 
in the onset and worsening of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver 
disease (MASLD).
AREAS COVERED: To illustrate the epidemiological evidence linking MASLD with 
food insecurity, and the potential pathobiological mechanisms underlying their 
association we searched the PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus database from 
inception to April 2025 for relevant keywords pertaining to the topic. Finally, 
we will discuss promising areas of future research in this field.
EXPERT OPINION: Research on food insecurity contributes to the establishment of 
the biopsychosocial disease model in the MASLD field. Understanding the broader 
sociocultural factors influencing food choices, which may disproportionately 
affect certain vulnerable populations, can help shift the focus from individual 
responsibility to a more comprehensive approach to addressing obesity-related 
metabolic dysfunction. Future studies should focus on quantifying descriptors of 
food insecurity more effectively. Additionally, further research is necessary to 
determine whether and to what extent global cultural advancements and specific 
education in food security can prevent and reverse the negative outcomes of food 
insecurity-associated MASLD.

Plain Language Summary: Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease 
(MASLD) is a condition characterized by the accumulation of fat in the liver due 
to obesity, diabetes, hypertension or dyslipidemia collectively known as the 
metabolic syndrome (MetS). It is one of the most common liver diseases globally, 
making it crucial to identify modifiable risk factors that contribute to its 
development and progression to more severe conditions such as fibrosis, 
cirrhosis, liver failure and liver cancer. In recent years, food insecurity has 
become a prevalent issue in the United States, defined as a household-level 
socio economic condition where there is limited or uncertain access to adequate 
and safe food. This has significant implications for the risk of chronic liver 
disease associated with MASLD, as it disrupts normal liver function and 
increases the likelihood of developing MetS. The interplay between social 
wellbeing and medical health in relation to these mechanisms is explored in 
depth in our article, along with a detailed analysis of potential research 
avenues and interventions to address food insecurity.

DOI: 10.1080/17474124.2025.2545812
PMID: 40778541