1. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2025 Jul 30;26(7):38696. doi: 10.31083/RCM38696.
eCollection  2025 Jul.

Epigenetic Mechanisms in Heart Diseases.

Yildiz M(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Faculty, Department of Biophysics, Trakya University, 22030 Edirne, 
Türkiye.

Heart diseases (HDs) continue to be among the major diseases that adversely 
affect human health worldwide, with complex interactions between genetic, 
environmental, and biochemical factors contributing to their progression. These 
include coronary heart disease, hypertension, heart failure, vascular 
calcification, etc. Cardiovascular diseases have been extensively studied in the 
Framingham Heart Study since 1948, spanning three generations over the past 70 
years, and are highly correlated with various factors, including biochemical, 
environmental, behavioral, and genetic factors. In recent years, epigenetic 
mechanisms have emerged as crucial regulators of cardiovascular pathology, 
influencing gene expression without altering the underlying DNA sequence. 
Moreover, early detection and diagnosis of heart diseases are crucial for 
improving treatment and prognosis. Recent studies on heart disease have found 
that the expression of potential candidate genes related to the disease is 
associated with epigenetic mechanisms. Indeed, abnormal methylation states have 
been detected in candidate genes that can serve as biomarkers to assess the 
progression of heart disease. Recent advances in next-generation sequencing 
techniques have contributed significantly to our understanding of heart 
diseases, including the role of DNA methylation, adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP)-dependent chromatin conformation and remodeling, post-translational 
modifications of histones and non-coding RNAs. Lastly, this review examines the 
latest discoveries in the epigenetic regulation of heart diseases, highlighting 
the roles of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), histone deacetylases (HDACs), 
sirtuins (SIRTs), and ten-eleven translocation proteins (TETs). Additionally, 
this review highlights preclinical therapeutic strategies targeting epigenetic 
modifiers, offering new avenues for precision medicine in cardiology. 
Understanding these epigenetic pathways is crucial for developing novel 
biomarkers and epigenetic-based therapies that aim to reverse maladaptive 
cardiac remodeling and enhance clinical outcomes.

Copyright: © 2025 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/RCM38696
PMCID: PMC12326461
PMID: 40776938

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest. 
Mustafa Yildiz is serving as Guest Editor of this journal. We declare that 
Mustafa Yildiz had no involvement in the peer review of this article and has no 
access to information regarding its peer review. Full responsibility for the 
editorial process for this article was delegated to John Lynn Jefferies.