1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Jul 25:2025.07.21.666043. doi: 
10.1101/2025.07.21.666043.

The Tricuspid Valve is Transcriptionally Active During Prolonged Pressure 
Overload, Right-Sided Heart Failure, and Valve Regurgitation.

Goodyke A, Gaweda B, Piekarska M, Arora S, Westgate M, Loyaga-Rendon R, Jani M, 
Rausch MK, Aguirre A, Prokop JW, Timek TA.

BACKGROUND: Right-sided heart failure (RHF), in the presence of tricuspid valve 
regurgitation (TR), can result from left-sided heart failure (LHF), pulmonary 
hypertension (PH), or heart malformations. The occurrence of RHF and TR 
represents a critical indicator of hospitalization rates and all-cause 
mortality. However, RHF has remained understudied, specifically with respect to 
the tricuspid valve, with few animal models to investigate the transformative 
processes and identify novel interventions.
METHODS: Using the outbred sheep ( Ovis aries ) model of pulmonary artery 
banding (PAB) that induces RHF and TR, we generated three batches of ribosomal 
reduced RNA sequencing for 354 samples (NCBI SRA PRJNA1182691) containing right 
ventricle, left ventricle, each tricuspid valve leaflet, each mitral valve 
leaflet, and the pulmonary artery that represents both male and female sheep. 
The reads were assembled into a de novo sheep heart transcriptome for 
differential analysis.
RESULTS: The de novo sheep heart transcriptome enhanced transcript mapping of 
reads by 43-45% in the heart valves relative to the known sheep reference 
transcriptome. The identified transcripts produce validated tissue-specific 
pathways in ventricles (2,756 isoforms), pulmonary arteries (535 isoforms), and 
valves (1,215 isoforms), with transcript differences between the mitral and 
tricuspid valve involved in extracellular and endocrine signaling. The 
transcriptome also produced robust sex differences encoded by sex chromosomes 
and autosomes, highlighting epigenetic and sex hormone differences in the heart. 
Echocardiography and differential expression suggest that 8 weeks after PAB, the 
right ventricle has extensive morphological changes and known stress-induced 
lipid processing dysregulation. At 16-weeks post-PAB, tricuspid valve leaflets 
show the most significant transcriptional changes, with alterations in endocrine 
and immune pathway genes involved in cellular and extracellular remodeling. 
Genes within the tricuspid valve with differential expression and known human or 
mouse heart phenotypes include FLNA , LTBP4 , VDR , CR2 , PIGQ , CENPF , ACKR3 , 
CR1 , KLF2 , and HIF3A .
CONCLUSIONS: This project highlights the complexity of heart valve tissues and 
their transcriptional activity in a sheep model of RHF. It suggests potential 
therapeutic interventions in heart valve remodeling in PAH, RHF, and TR. This 
work highlights the need for further human and model organism research into the 
dynamic valve cells and genes.
CLINICAL PERSPECTIVE: What Is New?: Improved cardiac and valve specific 
transcriptome mapping through de novo transcriptome for clinically relevant 
ovine model. Tricuspid valves show a sex dependent and active transcriptional 
response to pulmonary artery banding induced pulmonary hypertension and right 
sided heart failure.Transcriptional phenotypes in ovine model mirror known human 
heart disease phenotypes.Several transcripts identified with therapeutic 
potential for treating pressure overload conditions such as pulmonary 
hypertension.What Are the Clinical Implications?: Tricuspid valve remodeling due 
to pulmonary hypertension is accompanied by transcriptional alterations, and 
mechanical alterations alone may not be sufficient to address valve 
insufficiency.Valve and ventricle sex specific gene expression changes following 
pulmonary hypertension indicate a potential role for hormonal influences and a 
need for personalized treatment strategies.Improved patient outcomes for right 
heart failure, including diagnosis, early detection, and improved treatment 
strategies can be elucidated through the ovine model and supported through 
expanded interrogation of human tissues.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.07.21.666043
PMCID: PMC12330682
PMID: 40777379