1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2025 Aug 8. doi: 10.2215/CJN.0000000800. Online ahead
of  print.

A Qualitative Study to Investigate the Nutrition Perspectives and Experiences of 
Veterans with Chronic Kidney Disease.

Perez L(1)(2), Ujano-De Motta L(1)(2), Johnson-Koenke R(2)(3), Jani A(1)(4), 
Ikizler TA(5)(6), Raghavan S(1)(2)(7), Leonard C(1)(2)(8), Jones CD(1)(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)Rocky Mountain Regional Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Eastern Colorado 
Health Care System.
(2)Denver-Seattle Center of Innovation for Veteran-Centered and Value Driven 
Care.
(3)College of Nursing, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus.
(4)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, School 
of Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO.
(5)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, 
TN.
(6)Nashville Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley 
Health Care System.
(7)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, School of 
Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO.
(8)Division of Health Care Policy and Research, Department of Medicine, School 
of Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO.
(9)Division of Hospital Medicine, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of Colorado, Aurora, CO.

BACKGROUND: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) affects susceptible populations at 
higher rates than the general public. Dietary adherence, quality, and behaviors 
play a crucial role in CKD and chronic disease management. However, individuals 
with CKD, including Veterans and those with mission-driven occupations and 
cultures, face unique challenges navigating dietary recommendations and 
kidney-health promoting diets. Understanding factors such as military or 
occupational experiences, comorbidities, and dietary barriers, may lead to 
developing effective, patient-centered dietary interventions.
METHODS: We conducted a qualitative descriptive study and semi-structured 
interviews with 32 Veterans with CKD (stages 3b-5; including dialysis), mean age 
of 71 years, 54% White/Caucasian, and 16% women, receiving care at the Veterans 
Affairs (VA) Eastern Colorado Health Care System, from June 2023 to July of 
2024. Interview constructs included healthy eating, CKD management, food 
preferences and decision making. We conducted thematic analyses using an 
inductive approach to understand participants' perspectives and experiences.
RESULTS: Three overarching domains emerged: (1) Moments that Matter, shaping 
dietary behaviors by themes such as health crises, diagnoses, and the perceived 
mortal consequences of food choices; (2) Chronic Disease Perceptions, 
Management, and Adaptation, capturing the burden of rigid dietary restrictions, 
conflicting recommendations, and dichotomies between strict rules versus 
flexible healthy diet principles; and (3) Contextual Factors that Influence 
Health, Nutrition, and Adaptation, highlighting the impact of social support, 
military culture, and environmental influences on food behaviors.
CONCLUSIONS: Veterans' experiences with CKD nutrition and management are shaped 
by pivotal health events, rigid dietary frameworks, military-influenced eating 
habits, and other social-emotional contextual factors. Nutrition and healthcare 
approaches should focus on personalized, flexible approaches and leveraging 
existing VA-based principles that emphasize patient-centered care and 
experience. These include supporting individuals by acknowledging urgency in 
dietary decision-making, capitalizing on key moments for intervention, and 
increasing awareness of nutrition's role in health without reinforcing 
restrictive, unsustainable dietary patterns.

Copyright © 2025 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.0000000800
PMID: 40779332