1. JACC Case Rep. 2025 Aug 8:105000. doi: 10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105000. Online 
ahead of print.

Shone's Syndrome and Transplant: A Road Less Traveled.

Labrada L(1), Gupta T(2), Haeffele C(3), DeVore AD(4), Menachem J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Temple University Hospital, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Electronic address: 
lyana.labrada@tuhs.temple.edu.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, University of San Diego, San Diego, 
California, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford 
University, Palo Alto, California, USA.
(4)Duke Clinical Research Institute and Department of Medicine, Duke University 
School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

"Shone's syndrome" was identified in 1963 as a constellation of 4 coexisting 
lesions leading to left ventricular inflow and outflow obstruction. This 
congenital heart disease syndrome has hemodynamic consequences throughout the 
lifetime of patients with this syndrome, and these patients often progress to 
requiring advanced therapies. This case series reviews the complex 
decision-making involved in advanced therapy evaluation for this specific 
patient population. We present 8 cases of patients with Shone's syndrome who 
were referred for advanced therapies. Of these patients, 6 patients went on to 
heart transplant alone and 2 patients underwent dual organ transplant. Two 
patients died after transplant. These cases each highlight important 
considerations for transplant in this patient population, including the 
development of pulmonary hypertension, potential need for single vs dual organ 
transplant, and complex pre- and postoperative courses. We emphasize the 
importance of early referral for advanced therapies, multidisciplinary 
evaluation, and individualized care for these complex patients.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105000
PMID: 40778907

Conflict of interest statement: Funding Support and Author Disclosures The 
authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents 
of this paper to disclose.