1. Kidney360. 2025 Aug 8. doi: 10.34067/KID.0000000951. Online ahead of print.

Proceedings of the UAB CRRT Academy (2023-2024): Managing De-Escalation of Acute 
RRT and Optimizing Drug Dosing During RRT Transitions.

Beaubien-Souligny W(1), Bastin MT(2), Teixeira JP(3), Cerda J(4), Connor MJ 
Jr(5), Zeidman AD(6), Garimella PS(7), Juncos L(8), Lopez-Ruiz A(9), Mehta 
R(10), Reis T(11), Rizo-Topete L(12), Silver SA(13), Da Silva JR(14), Speer 
R(15), Vijayan A(16), Wells C(17), Wille K(18), Yessayan L(19), Tolwani A(15), 
Neyra JA(15).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, 
Montreal, Canada.
(2)Department of Pharmacy Practice and Science, University of Kentucky College 
of Pharmacy.
(3)Divisions of (1) Nephrology and (2) Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep 
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico, 
Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Albany Medical College, 
Albany, New York, United States of America.
(5)Divisions of (1) Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, & Sleep Medicine & 
(2)Renal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(6)Institute for Critical Care Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, Mount Sinai 
Hospital Department of Medicine Nephrology Division, New York, NY. Electronic 
address: amanda.dijanic@mssm.edu.
(7)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, University 
of California San Diego, San Diego, California, USA.
(8)Division of Nephrology, Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, Little 
Rock, AR, 72205, USA. jhholthoff@uams.edu.
(9)Department of Critical Care, AdventHealth Orlando FL.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego (UCSD), San 
Diego, CA, USA.
(11)Division of Nephrology, University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(12)Division of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario "Dr. Jose Eleuterio González, 
UANL, Monterrey, Mexico.
(13)Division of Nephrology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
(14)Baxter Healthcare.
(15)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(16)Intermountain Kidney Services, Intermountain Health, Salt Lake City, UT.
(17)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University of Mississippi 
Medical Center.
(18)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and 
Critical Care Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
USA.
(19)Division of Nephrology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

In this second installment of the proceedings of the University of Alabama at 
Birmingham Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy (CRRT) Academy, we focus on the 
topic of transitions of care in acute RRT. Though we have accumulated data from 
thousands of critically ill patients with acute kidney injury (AKI) randomized 
to different strategies for RRT initiation, no trial data exist to guide 
de-escalation of RRT in the intensive care unit. However, for survivors of 
severe AKI whose kidney function does not recovery rapidly enough to allow for 
liberation directly from CRRT, successful de-escalation of care requires the 
transition from CRRT to intermittent RRT modalities. These transition periods 
must be carefully navigated since they can be a source of complications, such as 
failure to transition or intra-dialytic hypotension, which are in turn 
associated with an increased risk of mortality and reduced odds of kidney 
recovery. In this review, we focus on the critical factors to consider during 
de-escalation of RRT care, with a focus on modality transition, the role of 
volume status in guiding the approach to de-escalation of RRT, and the vital 
importance of careful dosing of drugs, especially antimicrobial agents, during 
this transitional period.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.34067/KID.0000000951
PMID: 40779331