1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Jul 27:2025.07.23.666314. doi: 
10.1101/2025.07.23.666314.

Bidirectional Crosstalk Between Sleep and Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.

Imani S, Halouani A, Dahlka J, Burgess N, Antar S, Zhao YY, Chan SY, West JD, 
Weston M, Sassi Y.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is a devastating 
cardiopulmonary disease characterized by pulmonary vascular remodeling due to 
vascular cells dysfunction. Among other clinical signs, emerging data suggest 
poor sleep quality in patients with PAH; however, how poor sleep impacts 
hemodynamic burden, symptom severity, and pulmonary vascular remodeling during 
PAH progression remains unknown.
METHODS: We used two models of sleep disturbances (sleep fragmentation and 
chronic jet lag) and different mouse models of PAH to determine the effects of 
poor sleep on PAH. We carried out timepoint quantitative RT-PCR analyses to 
define the clock gene oscillations in human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells 
(PASMCs) isolated from non-PAH and PAH patients. Bulk RNA-sequencing analysis, 
immunostaining, and proliferation assays were used to explore the mechanisms by 
which poor sleep impacts PAH. Electroencephalogram and Electromyogram recordings 
(EEG/EMG) were used to determine whether PAH affects sleep in mice.
RESULTS: Poor sleep exacerbated right ventricular dysfunction, pulmonary 
vascular remodeling, and PAH. RNA-seq and immunostaining analyses showed that 
poor sleep induces lung inflammation. Inflammation affected the pulmonary 
vascular molecular clock to drive PASMC hyperproliferation and increased 
migration. SMC-specific deletion of Bmal1 protected mice from RV dysfunction, 
pulmonary vascular remodeling, and PAH. EEG/EMG measurements demonstrated that 
PAH causes poor sleep quality in mice. Lastly, we showed that improving sleep 
via melatonin delivery and blunting inflammation with clodronate inhibited 
pulmonary vascular remodeling and PAH.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that PAH causes poor sleep which in turn 
induces inflammation, increases PASMC proliferation, and exacerbates PAH. This 
suggests that the relationship between PAH and poor sleep is a self-amplifying 
cycle, and that a combination of hypnotic and anti-inflammatory drugs may give 
PAH patients better clinical outcomes.
CLINICAL PERSPECTIVE: What is New?: PAH causes poor sleep quality which in turn 
induces lung inflammation, PASMC proliferation, and exacerbated PAH.Bmal1 
rhythmicity is disrupted, and its expression is increased in lungs of patients 
with PAH.SMC-specific deletion of Bmal1 protects from PAH.Improving sleep 
quality and blunting inflammation attenuates PAH.What Are the Clinical 
Implications?: Bmal1 represents a promising disease-modifying agent with 
potential for clinical translation in the treatment of PAH.A combination of 
hypnotic and anti-inflammatory drugs has therapeutic potential to treat PAH.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.07.23.666314
PMCID: PMC12330576
PMID: 40777305